Dr Sara Harris: OK, let's have a look at this graph and these data.
The first two questions were likely the easiest, particularly if you already
have practice reading graphs.
You needed to find the highest value of the people arriving curve,
and then the highest value of the people leaving curve.
20 people arrived in minute five, that's the peak value of the blue curve that
shows people arriving.
And 21 people left during minute 25, that's
the peak of the red curve that shows people leaving.
So for those questions you needed to identify the highest values
on each of those curves.
You could also find the minutes at which the fewest people arrived,
which is minute 21, and at which the few people left, that's minute 8.
The third and fourth questions are harder.
To answer then we have to imagine how the party changes
over time, given fluctuations in numbers of people
leaving and arriving every minute.
Notice that for the first 13 minutes, the numbers of people arriving
are always higher than the numbers of people leaving.
So we're getting more and more crowded at the party
for each of those 13 minutes.
The area between those two curves represents the addition
of people over that time period.
And then, in minute 14, more people leave than arrive.
And for the rest of the 30 minutes the party
thins out with the fewest partiers left at minute 30.
During each minute, between minute 14 and 30, the numbers of people leaving
exceeds the number of people arriving.
Again, the area between the two curves is helpful,
it represents the net loss of people from minute 14 to minute 30.
We don't actually know anything about what happened at the party
before our particular half hour, nor after,
but notice that the orange shaded region on the right
is larger than the blue shaded region on the left.
Comparing these, you can tell that there are fewer people at the party
at the end of the 30 minutes than there were at the beginning.
We've had a net loss of people during this half hour.
The purpose of this party exercise is to practice
thinking about how the balance or imbalance of flows over time,
in this case people coming and leaving, changes the stock.
It's the historical combination of stock and flow
that determines the state of the system at any particular time.
Let's talk more about stock.
A stock is the amount of something, somewhere, at some time.
The amount of food in your kitchen is a stock.
The number of bicyclists in a city, that's a stock.
Prisoners in prison, that's a stock, too.
A stock can also be something that's harder
to count, like water in a bucket or water in a cloud
or helium in a balloon.
Or it could be something completely intangible, like goodwill or memories
or influence within an organization, all of which can be gained and lost.
As we saw with the party, stuff flows in and out of stocks.
We define a flow as a rate at which stuff adds or subtracts from a stock.
Since flow is a rate, there's always an element of time included.
For example, we might have apples picked per hour.
That's the rate at which apples flow out of the stock of apples on the tree,
and into the stock of apples in the basket.
During the melting season in the Arctic we
can measure sea ice melted per month.
Other examples are, say, fish born per year,
or knowledge in your brain gained or lost per decade.
There are two types of flows, there's inflow and outflow.
Inflow, as the name implies, is the rate at which stuff flows in.
And outflow is the rate at which stuff flows out.
The amount of stuff in any particular stock
can change over time if the inflows don't match the outflows.
Let's take a look at a classic analogy for systems dynamics, which
is a bathtub.
We'll start with no water in the tub, so the stock is zero.
There's a plug in the drain, so outflow is also 0.
Now let's turn on the faucet.
As you'd expect, if you've ever prepared a bath,
the water level rises over time.
And it rises at a rate that's determined by the rate of inflow from the faucet.
OK, let's turn the water off.
The drain is still plugged, so the output is still 0.
And now the inflow is also 0.
Since the flows are now equal, the water level representing the stock,
stays constant.
Now let's open the drain and see what happens.
Inflow is still 0 because the faucet's off.
But now outflow is greater than zero, so the water level falls over time.
But let's turn the faucet back on again, before the tab completely drains.
If we turn the faucet on so that the rate of water flowing in
equals the rate of water flowing down the drain,
then the water level stops dropping and it stabilizes.
Inflow equals outflow again.
Only this time the flows are nonzero.
Let's block the drain a little bit so that inflows exceeds outflow.
Watch the water level rise.
Now let's open the drain further so that the tub is draining
faster than the faucet is adding water.
Watch the water level fall.
If you've ever been in the position where
you had to bail out a leaking boat, you have some experience
with the balance of inflow and outflow.
To summarize stock and flow with the bathtub,
the stock, that's the water level in this case, at any moment
is the result of the combined history of inflow and outflow.
At equilibrium, or steady state, inflow equals outflow.
We can have equilibrium at a wide range of different water levels,
but if inflow is not equal to outflow, the stock will change.
Now we'll take the bath tub analogy one step further
to get us into the world of feedbacks.
In a bathtub, the rate of water leaving through the drain
depends partly on the water level itself.
When the water level is lower, the tub drains more slowly.
Let's start with the tub about half full, at equilibrium,
so that inflow equals outflow.
Now let's crank up the faucet to double the inflow, which
will create an imbalance and cause the water level to rise.
But as the water level rises, the pressure on the drain
increases, so the outflow also increases,
slowing the water level's rate of rise.
What ends up happening is that the water level rises to a point
where the pressure on the drain causes a rate of outflow that
exactly matches the inflow.
It's a new, higher water level, but we're back at equilibrium.
This is an example of a feedback, in which the amount of a stock
influences a flow in or out of that stock.
And the flow, in turn, feeds back to influence the stock.
In this particular case, we're looking at what's
called a stabilizing or balancing feedback, a feedback that brings
the system back toward equilibrium.
So flow depends on stock, depends on flow.
Feedbacks happen when some perturbation occurs and the system responds.
It responds either by amplifying the perturbation,
pushing the system even farther in the direction of the perturbation.
Or the system responds to counteract the perturbation, stabilizing the system,
like the response of the drain coupled with the stock of water
brought the tub to steady state.
A perturbation could happen to either the stock or the flow.
The ramifications then feedback between the two.
In the climate system, you can think of feedbacks as processes
or a sequence of processes that both responds to temperature changes,
and in turn, influence temperature.
So they have to both respond and influence.
For example, imagine a glacier.
It's a bunch of white ice.
At equilibrium, the stock of ice in the glacier stays constant.
Some is added every year through snowfall
and some leaves each year through melting or calving of icebergs.
Imagine a perturbation in temperature that makes earth a little bit cooler.
With cooler temperatures the glacier might grow a little.
We know that clean, white ice reflects solar radiation back
to space pretty well.
It doesn't absorb a lot of incoming energy.
So a larger glacier would mean a larger area
covered with ice, which means more solar radiation reflects directly
back to space without being absorbed.
So that will cooler earths temperature a little bit more,
which helps the ice sheet grow bigger, which helps cool the temperature more.
This is an example of an amplifying feedback.
It's a response to a perturbation that pushes the system in the same direction
as the initial perturbation pushed it.
To generalize, if something caused global temperature to increase,
an amplifying feedback would increase global temperature
further, which would keep the feedback process going.
You can imagine the ice sheet in reverse as well.
If temperature goes up, the ice sheet will melt a little more,
decreasing the area covered by reflective ice, which in turn helps
earth warm a little bit more.
This is also an amplifying feedback.
A party can grow with feedback.
Maybe a small party attracts attention.
More people come.
The party attracts more attention and more people come, et cetera.
Let's take a look at a stabilizing feedback in the climate system.
The Earth itself is at some temperature and it emits energy.
The amount of energy objects emit depends on their temperature.
Warmer objects emit more energy than cooler objects.
So if, for some reason, the inflow of energy to earth's
surface increases, warming earth a little, as a noun warmer object,
earth would respond by emitting more energy than before,
increasing the energy outflow to match the new level of inflow.
By emitting more energy, it helps stabilize its temperature
and brings the system back toward equilibrium.
That equilibrium might be at a different temperature than it started with,
but it would be a stable new temperature until, of course,
the next perturbation.
This is similar to the bathtub, which could have many different stable water
levels.
This feedback involving radiation is actually
the most important stabilizing feedback in Earth's climate system.
To summarize stabilizing feedbacks, they're
a response to a perturbation that pushes the system in the opposite direction
as the initial perturbation pushed it.
To generalize, if something caused global temperature to increase,
a stabilizing feedback would respond to counteract the temperature rise, which
would stabilize the system, though not necessarily
at the original temperature.
Imagine that the party gets too crowded so people don't like it and they leave,
until the party reaches a comfortable size again and people stop leaving.
That would also be a stabilizing feedback.
Just as a side note, some of you know amplifying feedbacks
as positive feedbacks and stabilizing feedbacks as negative feedbacks.
That's fine if you know that terminology.
In this course, we'll use amplifying and stabilizing,
because the words positive and negative feedback have
everyday meanings that are different from their scientific meanings.
And there tends to be confusion around those terms.
In summary, earth's climate system has lots of different stocks,
lots of different flows among those stocks, and many feedback processes.
Some feedbacks in the climate system amplify perturbations,
and some feedbacks stabilize the system after a perturbation.
We've described two important climate feedbacks, an amplifying one involving
ice and reflectivity, and a stabilizing one,
involving earth's temperature and the amount of energy it radiates.
Keep your eye out for feedbacks in the world around you.
You'll encounter them everywhere if you look.
We'll examine more climate related ones later.